---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Reflection of coding standards in Software Development "
date: 2024-09-26
published: true
labels:
  - ESlint
  - Coding Standards
  - Software Development
---

As a college student, a lot of my classmates consider coding standards as a tedious process they have to follow before turning in a coding assignment. Their minds immediately go to the small formatting details like whether to use two spaces or four for indentation, or where to place a closing curly brace. I used to share this view, until I gained some industry experience during an internship. There, I saw firsthand how essential coding standards are in large projects where multiple people are collaborating. In these environments, coding standards go beyond formatting, they ensure consistency, improve readability, and allow for easy collaboration across teams. 

The importance of coding standards is really appreciated when working on a project with several people. If there were no coding standards, everyone would write using their own coding style and this lack of consistency would make reading and understanding code a lot harder than it needs to be, especially for someone looking in from the outside. Code that follows a consistent style is easier to read, review and debug, which can save developers tons of hours of work. 

While working at my internship, I also noticed that a well-designed coding standard can also enforce best practices in the field of software development, such as quality, maintainability and scalability. These were qualities and practices that the team I worked with prioritized that stemmed from the coding standards. By following these standards, this helped the developers on my team avoid bugs and produce code that’s easier to understand and extend in the future.

In one of my classes, we are using a tool called ESlint which is a tool that helps enforce coding standards in JavaScript and TypeScript projects by automatically checking for common errors and deviations from best practices. When I first started using ESLint with Visual Studio Code (VSCode), I’ll admit it was a bit frustrating. At first, every time I ran the lint checker, I was bombarded with error messages—many of which seemed minor, like indentation issues, missing spaces, or inconsistent variable naming. Manually fixing these problems felt tedious and I was unsure why I needed to do this, because I was the only person working on this project. 

But then I was informed that we are doing this for the experience and exposure to the tool. After a while, I started to see the bigger picture. Once I adjusted to ESLint’s standards and began writing code in a way that avoided these errors, my workflow became smoother. I spent less time going back to fix formatting issues, and my code became more consistent.

The true value of coding standards becomes apparent when you look at their role in larger organizations, like I saw during my internship. When having hundreds of people working together on the same project, coding standards is vital. It eliminates issues such as individual coding preferences, and makes the code much easier to maintain and scale, and reduces the risk of introducing bugs or breaking functionality. Although a lot of students may not understand the importance of coding standards now, they will appreciate it pretty quickly when they start partaking in large software projects. 
